<link href="http://kevinburke.bitbucket.org/markdowncss/markdown.css" rel="stylesheet"></link>

# Testing infrastructure

This document tries to briefly describe the intended way of running tests.
There are 3 main sections:

 - organising tests
 - running a whole test-suite with ``run_tests.sh``
 - testing a single trace with ``run_trace.sh``
 

# Organising Tests

_Test-suites_ consist essentially of collections of trace files. The
tools `posix` and `check` are used to process these traces. There may
also be auxiliary documents like text-files with explanations or other
resources however as well.

All files belonging to a test-suite with name `test-suite-name` should
be placed in directory ``test-suite-name``.  As mentioned these files
can be separated in two groups:

 - trace files, i.e. files with the ending ``.trace``
 - other files
 

## Naming conventions for trace files
Trace files should follow the following naming convention:

	{name}{optional target}-{trace-type}.trace


The ``name`` part can be freely chosen and should describe the tests
inside the trace.

The ``trace-type`` part has to be 
  + ``int`` for INTERP-traces,
  + ``fs`` for FS-traces or 
  +``os`` for OS-traces. 

The ``optional target`` part is optional and usually left empty. If it
is ``-posix`` this test is run only with the tool `posix`, i.e. on the
real file-system. If it is ``-check`` only the tool `check` is
used. Otherwise, both tools are used to run the tests.

Other files can be anything. They should just avoid the ending
``.trace``. They are only copied by the testing-infrastructure and not
processed in any other way.

# .tmpl directories

Some test scripts are autogenerated. Some are manually written (the
"adhoc" traces). We want to keep these different types of trace
separate. But we also want to put the adhoc scripts in the same
directory as the generated scripts when we construct the test suite
prior to testing. For this reason, we place adhoc script in `xxx.tmpl`
directories, and copy them into the `xxx` directory when we construct
the test suite proper. This happens in the script `gentests.sh`. To
summarize: put adhoc scripts in directories `xxx.tmpl`, not
the plain `xxx` directories.


## Example

The subdirectory ``file_descriptors`` contains the following files

 - ``adhoc_file_descriptor_change_tests-int.trace``
 - ``adhoc_lseek_tests-int.trace``
 - ``adhoc_open_multiple_tests-check-os.trace``
 - ``adhoc_open_tests-int.trace``
 - ``adhoc_pread_tests-int.trace``
 - ``adhoc_pwrite_tests-int.trace``
 - ``readme.txt``
 
 This describes a test-suite with name ``file_descriptors`` which
 consists of 6 traces and a file ``readme.txt``, which contains some
 high-level description of the test-suite. Most of these traces are
 INTERP-traces that are intended to be used with both ``posix`` and
 ``check``. However, ``adhoc_open_multiple_tests-check-os.trace`` is
 an OS-trace that is only used with ``check``.


## ``run_tests.sh``

``run_tests.sh`` runs a whole test-suite. Run a test-suite with
``run_tests.sh my-test-suite-dir`. To run our example suite use e.g.

	run_tests.sh file_descriptors
	
``run_tests.sh`` then creates a test-directory, called test-directory
in the following. This test-directory is by default created in the
current directory. However, this can be changed by setting the
variable OUTBASEDIR in ``run_tests.sh``. Notice, that the output is
not stored in the repository for size reasons. The name of this
directory consists of the current date, the name of the suite and a
random suffix. Moreover, a sub-directory ``results`` is created in
this test-directory.  It copies all files belonging to the test-suite
in the test-directory and runs ``run_trace.sh`` on each of the trace
files. ``run_trace.sh`` is explained in detail below.  Essentially, it
executes the tests described by a trace-file and stores the results in
sub-directory ``results``.


## ``run_trace.sh``

``run_trace.sh`` is used to run a single trace file. It should be run
while being inside a test-directory. It is important that a
sub-directory ``results`` exists in the current directory, where some
results can be stored. Having met these requirements, ``run_trace.sh
my.trace`` executes the trace ``my.trace``. Adding the option ``-q``,
i.e. running ``run_trace.sh -q my.trace`` runs the trace in quiet
mode.

``run_trace.sh`` behaviour depends on the type of trace. For an
INTERP-trace `my-int.trace`, it interprets the trace with both posix
and and check and stores the results in `results/posix-results-my` and
`results/check-results-my`. Moreover it stores the results of running
posix as a FS-trace `results/posix-results-my-fs.trace`. This FS-trace
is used to confirm with `check` that the results of posix agree with
the specification. If the trace-name ends with `-check` or `-posix`
only this tool is used to execute the trace.

Given an FS- or OS-trace, ``run_trace.sh`` runs `check` and `posix` on
this trace to confirm that the results recorded in the trace agree
with both the specification and posix. In this case, no files are
generated in `results`, since all relevant results are recorded in the
trace anyhow. Again, depending on the name of the trace the execution
of `check` or `posix` might be skipped.


## Troubleshooting

- `check` or `posix` can't be found

   Edit the file ``run_trace.sh`` and modify the variables
   ``check_command`` and ``posix_command`` to point to the location
   of the commands on your system.
   
- ``No such file or directory`` and similar problems

   When running ``run_tests.sh`` make sure your current working
   directory is the root directory of the tests, i.e. the directory
   the script ``run_tests.sh`` is stored in.
   
   Similarly, when running ``run_trace.sh`` make sure you are inside a
   test-directory. This means that the trace you want to run is in the
   current directory and a sub-directory ``results`` exists.
